>> Richard Feldman: All right,
welcome to C Fundamentals.
I'm Richard Feldman.
Thanks for coming everybody.
Yeah, we've got some here to get set up.
This is just instructions for
the exercises, so
don't worry if you don't
have that set up right now.
You can totally follow along in
the slides if you don't have this set up.
Hopefully every machine you're on, if you
are using a macOS or Windows Subsystem for
Linux or actual Linux, you should already
have a C compiler on your machine.
[LAUGH] So you won't need anything
else to be able to do the exercises.
So it shouldn't be much of a set up.
So, we're gonna go through a couple
of different sections here.
So the first is we're just gonna have
a little introduction section right here.
And in this section we're just
gonna talk about what is C,
why is C still popular today, and why is
there no windows version for this course?
And finally,
just a little bit of a course overview.
So I'll start off by just answering
the basic question, what is C?
So C is one of the top 10 most
popular programming languages today,
right now in 2025, and
this has been true for decades.
It is not only a very
popular language today, but
it has been a very popular language for
a very long time.
C was originally designed to build UNIX or
for building the UNIX operating system.
Today, there's a whole
lot of spin offs of UNIX.
So macOS is based on the BSD
flavor of UNIX, as is iOS.
Linux is its own flavor of UNIX that's
separate from BSD, and actually,
later on in the workshop, we're gonna see
a relevant distinction between Linux and
BSD when it comes to writing C code.
Android, also based on UNIX.
Windows is not based on UNIX,
but it is also written in C.
Other things that are not operating
systems that are written in C include
PostgreSQL, MySQL, redis, probably every
database you've ever used there's a very
good chance that it was written in C.
Python, like programming languages,
yeah, php, Ruby.
This might surprise you that so
many things today are written in C.
Considering that it's a language that
was originally released in 1972,
which is over 50 years ago at this point.
So to say that C has had a lot of staying
power is really, really an understatement.
To put this in perspective, 1972,
the year that the C came out,
this was Stevie Wonder released
the song Superstition, and ABBA,
the band [LAUGH] was
first initially formed.
So this was a long time ago.
The world looked very different,
and the world of programming
especially it looked very different.
So when they were building C this
was literally the machine they were
building it on.
This is a PDP-11.
Now, this is not quite back
in the punch card era, so
I actually brought a little prop.
If you ever wonder what a punch card was,
I bought this on eBay for
about a dollar 50 plus shipping.
[LAUGH] You can still get these things.
So back in the way, back in the day,
you would actually physically punch
holes in a card and that was your UI.
That was your UX,
this is your feedback loop.
They had a slightly
different feedback loop.
It was significantly improved over
punch cards on this machine here.
This is Dennis Ritchie, who created C,
and Ken Thompson, who designed UNIX.
And actually we were talking a little
bit about Go earlier, Ken Thompson,
also one of the designers of Golang.
And this machine that they're
working on is called the PDP-11.
So the PDP-11, [COUGH] you might notice,
does not have a monitor.
And if you look at their eyesight,
what are they actually looking at?
They're looking down at this thing
that's right above the keyboard.
So what is that thing?
That thing is a teletype.
So a teletype, for
those who are not familiar,
this is a little video of
a [LAUGH] teletype in action.
A teletype is an old, essentially
combination keyboard/typewriter.
So a typewriter, you press a key and
it immediately puts a character onto
a piece of paper, it prints it.
Now what they're doing is,
at first they're doing that, but
then when they press Enter, you might
notice that it starts typing without them
actually pressing the keys more.
So the idea behind a teletype is you
can use it as both input and output.
So, they are now running a computer
program, and the output of that computer
program is being physically printed
onto the page by the teletype.
So if you've ever wondered why
computers use the term print for
writing to the screen, this is why.
Back then it was a very intuitive
name cuz it's, well, yeah,
you're gonna print now [LAUGH] you're
printing characters onto the teletype.
And sure enough, as we're gonna see, C
uses the term print because literally this
was the machine that they were originally
doing it on, was a PDP-11 with a teletype.
I mentioned this because
this context is relevant for
a lot of the design decisions and
some of the things that
maybe today don't feel super ergonomic
that we're gonna encounter in this course,
such as really short kind of weird
variable names and things like that.
You can imagine, if you were working on
one of these things where you literally
have a physical piece of paper
constraining the width of the output,
having short variable names is
kind of an important thing.
It's not you have somebody who's really
dogmatic about their formatting and
saying, you must stick to 80 character
width as a matter of our formatting
configuration.
It's no, no, no, 80 characters is
literally all you get, and that's it.
The physical printer does not
go past 80 characters [LAUGH] so
that's all you got to work with.
That type of thing.
Also, they had a lot of
performance constraints.
So the PDP-11 had a whopping
256 kilobytes of memory.
It had 1-core single CPU.
So no multi-core anything,
no parallel processing of any kind.
It ran at a blistering 125
kilohertz on that 1-core.
So not only was it 110 of a megahertz,
not even close to a gigahertz.
So this is essentially the world that they
were living in when they designed and
developed C.
Despite that they were able
to build a language that
supported building all of these
tools that we still use today.
Which then leads to the question, if this
was the language that they were building
for this kind of hardware, why would
people still use it on modern hardware
when modern hardware runs so much faster?
Well, one of the things you might notice
about all of these pieces of software on
the screen here is that they're
all things that really,
really care about performance.
They're things where if you can get
something to run acceptably fast on this
kind of hardware, imagine what you
can do with something that has 3264,
gigabytes of memory and
16-core CPU and multiple gigahertz.
Yeah, you can get something that runs
very, very fast on modern hardware.
So fundamentally,
what people sort of jokingly,
kind of half seriously refer
to C as is portable assembly.
And assembly language is essentially one
very thin layer of abstraction on top of
hardware machine instructions
that the CPU understands.
So it's instead of ones and
zeros, you have some actual text.
So it's a programming language.
It's not an actual writing bits and
bytes by hand.
But the level of abstraction that it
adds on top of that is very, very thin.
And it's also very machine-specific.
So when you're writing assembly,
you're writing assembly for
a particular CPU architecture.
So C is portable in the sense that it's
not technically coupled to any one
particular CPU architecture, although
as we will see later in the course,
you do have the option of doing some
more sort of targeted things depending
on what you're building for.
So it's not 100% portable, but
it is way more portable than assembly,
that's for sure.
And the reason that all of these programs
are still using C today is fundamentally,
it lets you write software
that runs really, really fast.
And the way that it does this is not
because it has some sort of magical
optimizer, although they do have very nice
optimizers these days, but mainly because
C offers you the ability to essentially
do zero-overhead programming or very,
very close to it.
About as close as you can get
without a little assembly.
And actually, C includes inline assembly
in case you wanna drop down and
do actual zero-overhead programming
in the middle of your C program and
just talk directly to the hardware
that you're targeting.
And this is a very powerful
way to get performance.
Sometimes it's pretty manual,
sometimes it's pretty unsafe.
I would say that C is also almost
zero-safety programming in addition to
being zero-overhead, and
this is one of C's major shortcomings.
Is that you can really not only
shoot yourself in the foot, but
really blow your whole foot off with C.
And don't worry, in the exercises
we're gonna see how to do that.
So, [LAUGH], we'll have some fun with that
in a kind of constrained non-production
environment.
Yeah?
>> Speaker 2: So by overhead, do you mean
that just translation that it takes to get
from the layer above machine
code to machine code?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, great question.
So to be more specific about
what I mean about zero-overhead,
really what I mean is things, I guess,
the biggest example of overhead I
can think of is garbage collection.
So any programming language that has
a garbage collector, that's a big
convenience and it's a big boost for
safety, but it's also a lot of overhead.
You have GC pauses now, and
also there's just a lot of book keeping.
The amount of memory that your program is
gonna use is gonna go up significantly if
you have a garbage collector.
A lot of things are gonna run more slowly.
C doesn't have a garbage collector.
And you can take that example and
apply it to a number of other things.
It's really basic stuff like if I'm in
Java or JavaScript, and I make an object
that's gonna do a heap allocation, there's
gonna be some metadata on it at runtime.
In C, it's no, there's no metadata,
there's no allocation.
There's just the bare ones and zeros
that are required to store the info, and
that's nothing else in memory.
And you take that and
you apply that to the whole language, and
it really starts to add up.
The gap gets bigger and
bigger between C and
languages that have more overhead than C.
And also, finally,
C is the language that other languages use
to talk to each other in the modern day.
So pretty much any programming
language you can think of today,
there is a almost 100% chance that that
language has some way of talking to C.
Because it's just sort of the lingua
franca that's sort of emerged, and
in part because of its popularity.
So if you want to do, for example,
interop between Node.js and
other language,
Node.js supports C interop.
Haskell, which we talked about earlier,
has C interop.
Rust has C interop.
Pretty much every language
has some sort of C interop.
Really, one of the only
exceptions to this, technically,
would have been JavaScript in the browser,
which, for a long time, had absolutely no
way to talk to C, although now through
WebAssembly, that is kind of possible.
But it's really taken off as this way to
have one language talk to another one.
If you've got Python embedded in Rust,
or something like that.
The way that Python and Rust are
interacting and talking to each other is
using C as an intermediary or
at least the C ABI, which is essentially
the way that C represents things in
memory even if it's not literal.c files.
>> Speaker 3: When people
say portable assembly or
they can see assembly
through their C code,
do they mean this because they know
how the language works internally?
>> Richard Feldman: So
when people say portable assembly,
the main thing that they're talking about
is that C offers you essentially the same
benefits as assembly in terms
of minimizing overhead.
It's not quite true.
Assembly does give you a little bit more
control over things like CPU registers
than C does.
But the portability part really refers
to the fact that I can write a .c file,
I can write my C source code.
And then without changing that
code at all, compile it for, for
example, this MacBook here
is an ARM64 processor.
My desktop computer at home
is an Intel x64 processor.
These are different CPU architectures.
If I were doing assembly programming for
this MacBook versus that desktop
Intel that I have at home, those would
just be different assembly programs.
The source code files would
have to be different.
In contrast, if I'm writing C,
I can write one C program and
then just tell the compiler to build one
for ARM64 and build one for x64, and
the same exact C code will work and
give me two different runnable binaries,
executables, that I can run one on
the MacBook and one on the Intel.
So that's the difference.
It's portability in terms of being able
to write your source code once and
then compile it to multiple
different target architectures.
A lot of other languages will do
this by having a virtual machine or
something that's like a runtime.
So the Java virtual machine
is a very popular one.
Obviously browsers have
JavaScript virtual machines.
But that's a much higher
overhead version of things.
You notice if you actually go to download
a browser, you go to download the Java
virtual machine,
which is just a binary executable.
On the download page, they'll say,
download this for ARM64 Mac or
for Intel Linux or something like that.
So that's what they mean by portability
is across operating systems and
CPU architectures.
Okay, so basically, we're gonna
talk about the course overview.
So first we're gonna talk
about strings and numbers.
We're gonna get into some file I/O.
We're gonna get into building an actual
static webserver using that stuff.
And then the very end, we're gonna talk
a little bit about basically how you would
use the things you've learned if you
wanted to make a Node.js C addon.
For time constraints, we're not actually
gonna build the Node.js C addon, but
I did wanna mention it at
the very end of the course,
just if you wanted to take these concepts
and apply them in the JavaScript world,
this is how you would
actually go about doing that.
Cool, with that we can dive right into
part one or we can pause and do questions.
>> Speaker 4: How did
you benchmark the HTTP.
>> Richard Feldman: [LAUGH] How
did I benchmark the http-server?
So this was extremely, like I said,
unscientific, and mostly just for fun.
All I did was I took
the Frontend Masters website,
just downloaded the HTML
assets from the browser.
So it's just like the index that HTML and
the JavaScript and the CSS in the images
and whatnot, put those in a local folder
and then for each of these, I went into
that local folder, just spun it up, spun
up the http-server, opened my browser.
I think it was either Chrome or
Firefox, I forget which.
Might be Chrome, I don't know.
I use Firefox as my daily driver, but
I'm using Chrome for this workshop.
And I just opened it up locally, opened up
the Network tab and just took a screenshot
of how long it took to load
the assets after I refresh the page.
So these nine milliseconds whatever
on down is really just basically,
how long was it between when the browser
got the request to load the page and
when it actually finished getting those
things off the disk into the browser?
And you might be thinking, well,
how much work could it possibly
be doing [LAUGH] to do that?
Fun fact, the actual original motivation
for this was that I was using the Rust
http-server and REPL that runs
in WebAssembly in the browser.
And I was actually seeing really long
multi-second load times locally in my
static http-server whenever I was
trying to test the website, and I was,
what is going on here?
This should be really simple.
And that led to me sort of being, I bet
I could write a simple http-server in C
that's not gonna have this
performance problem very quickly.
And sure enough, it was.
And so that ended up being the example
I decided to go with for this course.
Other questions?
>> Speaker 5: What are your thoughts
on the US government saying everyone
should switch to memory safe
languages like C and C++?
>> Richard Feldman: What are your thoughts
on the US government saying everyone
should switch to memory safe
languages like C and C++?
I don't have any thoughts on the, I don't
know, the government policy aspect.
At the very, very beginning of my career,
I worked for
a company that made satellite and
sensor stuff.
And I had to get secret clearance and do a
little bit of US government, I don't know,
rules and
regulations kind of interacting stuff.
But kind of my takeaway from that was, a
lot of these policies seem kinda silly and
arbitrary and don't seem to have the
right, it seems they had a good intention,
but they kind of wandered off the path.
And that seems like one of those to me.
There's a lot of use cases where memory
safety is essentially unavoidable.
And also, as we saw in that very silly
benchmark, but also it's been my
experience generally that if you
really wanna maximize performance,
memory safety is unavoidable.
It would be nice if it
turned out to be the case,
that you could get Rust levels of memory
safety and also still maximum performance.
But at least in 2025,
it's just not the case.
And I say that having spent a huge
number of hours writing Rust, and
it's literally my day job is to write Rust
for a very high-performance code editor.
Actually the fastest code editor, I think,
we can comfortably say in the world.
So, I'm not saying that from a position
of not having tried this stuff,
I've done really,
really high-performance stuff.
If you wanna use the memory safe
subset of Rust, say safe Rust,
you just can't get to the absolute
top-tier performance.
So maybe that's fine,
because maybe I don't know the use cases
that they're talking about in these
regulations are not things that need
to be absolutely as fast as possible.
But if they are, then I don't know,
that probably would be misguided.
But to be honest, I haven't really thought
much about those types of regulations
since I very briefly worked in [LAUGH]
the space that cared about 20 years ago.
>> Speaker 5: So when people say that C is
not safe, what are they meaning by that?
>> Richard Feldman: When people
say that C is not safe, generally,
they specifically mean memory unsafe.
And we are gonna see plenty of
examples of that in the exercises.
Explicitly, I have sections in
the exercises where I'm, and
now try changing this number to
something else and watch what happens.
[LAUGH] And we're gonna see exactly
what memory safe looks and feels like.
So I don't wanna get into a ton
of detail about it right now.
But when people say C is unsafe,
what they basically mean is that if
you make a mistake in C, the consequences
can be much more severe than if you
make a mistake in Node.js or
Java or something like that.
And we'll see what those consequences are.
[LAUGH] In fact, in part one exercises,
we will show how you can leak
secrets by getting one number wrong,
[LAUGH] secrets out of arbitrary memory.